china yeah but meanwhile the people from
europe were walking right past them
and that's where the strain came from
that was infecting this area
and that's what the cdc just
learned last week and this is going back
to february
right on one of the most studied topics
ever
again just learn the lessons
of what happened you now add that piece
of information on the europe trips and
then you see the number of flights that
came from europe during that time
where they landed and now you it
explains
why you've seen the outbreak in chicago
that you've seen why you've seen the
number of cases in new york
because yes the flights were landing
here people were coming from italy and
uk and from european countries and
nobody
thought to screen them nobody was on
guard
and you add that to the density of new
york especially in new york city
and that virus just took off okay
we didn't know we didn't know now we do
we also can look back in history you
look at that 1918 flu
pandemic that they talk about the places
that
opened too soon saw that flu
come right back and by the way that
flu was not one wave that was three
waves
first wave second wave third wave second
wave was worse
than the first wave
and you see watch the other countries
that went through this before us
right we're not the first one down the
chute there were other countries that
went down before us
you see they wanted to reopen also they
were feeling the pressure on reopening
and you study those cases and you see
that you reopen too
soon or you reopen unintelligently
and you can then have an immediate
backlash
and that's not speculation that is
looking at
other countries and look at what what
has happened around
the world and then you talk to the
experts who know
listen to what they're saying dr fauci
who i think is one of the
uh best voices and minds on this dr
fauci has been
through this in in different iterations
he was one of the pioneers on the hiv
virus
and aids and he says we could be
in for a bad fall and a bad winter could
be
why because he doesn't know he's not
sure but could be
for a bad fall or bed winter okay so
put all of this in the in the equation
and then also uh acknowledge and
actualize
that the truth is that nobody knows
what happens next and when it happens
well how can that be that nobody knows
we're so sophisticated we have so much
intelligence we have so many experts
this is the united states of america how
can it be that no one knows
because no one knows i speak to the best
experts
globally globally
and nobody can tell you for sure
now experts we look to experts and we
expect them to know so we push them to
know
answer the question tell me when what's
going to happen in september what's
going to happen in december
sometimes the answer is i don't know
sometimes that's the honest answer
i was talking to my daughters last night
and they said you know
you say at your briefings i don't know
how can you say that first i'm not
really sure they watch my briefings but
uh they're right sometimes i say i don't
know
why because i don't know
and if you don't know say you don't know
and uh i speak again to the best minds
in this country the best minds around
the globe and
they don't know so if you don't know
say you don't know it doesn't mean
you're not smart
no reason to get defensive i don't know
when you know what you don't know and
admit it it will actually keep you
safe my daughters don't quite agree with
this yet but i haven't given up on the
concept
know what you don't know know
when you don't know what the future
holds you can be safe because then you
can prepare for different possibilities
and that's where we are we don't know
we will be prepared for all
possibilities so
reopening chart a course with the best
information you have
learning from the lessons you have but
be
able to correct that course depending on
what happens
which means don't act emotionally
don't act because i feel this i feel
that
because someone said well other states
are opening so
you must be able to open if other states
are opening if we get the anecdotal
forget the atmospheric forget the
environmental forget the emotional
look at the data look at the
measurements look at the science follow
the facts
and that's what we've done here from day
one uh
this is no uh gut instinct this is
look at the data look at the science
look at the metrics
move forward measuring
what you can and what you know and then
be
prepared to adjust well i want
specificity i want to know for sure you
don't
but there's liberation in knowing that
so let's do this intelligently based on
metrics
and we'll see what happens and we'll
adjust to whatever happens
well what does that mean on metrics you
can measure
this and we have to measure this you
look
at that percentage and the rate of
hospitalizations
which we have right that's the chart
that goes up and down
you watch that hospitalization rate do
your diagnostic testing so you
know how many people are testing
positive and you can watch that
rate going up or down or flat
do the contract tracing so after the
testing you follow up and you do that
contact
tracing and you are then reducing the
infection spread
by isolating the positives
if you do those things you will
control the rate of transmission of the
virus
which is everything nobody says you're
going to eliminate
the virus in the short term no
body but you can control the rate of
transmission
and if you can control the rate of
transmission you can control the rate of
transmission
from becoming an outbreak or an epidemic
or
overwhelming your public health system
that is the best you can do so
control the rate of transmission to what
they call 1.1 or less
1.1 is every person infects 1.1
other people more than one other person
if you're doing that
that is an outbreak that means it's
going to increase exponentially and it's
going to be out of control
as long as your rate of transmission is
manageable
and low then reopen your businesses
and reopen the businesses in phases
so you're increasing that activity level
while you're watching the rate of
transmission
rate of transmission goes up stop
the reopening close the valve close the
valve right away so
reopen businesses do it in phases
and watch that rate of transmission it
gets over 1.1
stop everything immediately that's where
the other countries wound up
they started to reopen they exceeded the
1.1
it became an outbreak again they had to
slow down
rather than starting and stopping you'd
rather have a controlled
start so you don't have to stop
right and that's what you learn from the
other countries you reopen too
fast then you have to stop and nobody
wants to have gone through all of this
and then start just to stop again
well how does that happen first of all
it's not going to happen
statewide this state has
different regions which are in much
different situations than other regions
in the state
and rather than wait for the whole state
to be ready
reopen on a regional basis
if upstate has to wait for down state to
be ready
they're going to be waiting a long time
so
analyze the situation on a regional
basis
okay and you
look at a region on four measures
the number of new infections your health
care capacity
if the infections goes too high you
overwhelm your health system
now you're italy with people on gurneys
in a hallway because your hospital
system can't handle it
do your diagnostic testing so you're
seeing
how the infection is increasing or
decreasing
and do the contact tracing have that
system in place
so when you test and you find the
positive you trace the contacts from
that positive person
and you're isolating them to bring down
the rate
and you do that on a regional basis
that system has to be in place for a
regional
basis how do you start
when can i start reopening
we look at guidelines from the cdc which
say
a region has to have at least 14 days of
decline in total hospitalizations and
death on a three-day rolling average so
you take a three-day average you have to
have 14 days of decline
you can't have more than 15 new total
cases or five
new deaths on a three-day rolling
average
this is telling you that you're
basically
at a plateau level
that you can actually start to reopen
then you're watching the rate of
infection and the spread of the
infection
and the benchmark there is fewer than
two new covert patients
per 100 000 residents right
it's based on your population to account
for the variance
in the different sizes of regions across
the state
then anticipate protect yourself from
all possibilities well what if we have a
surge
again never
fill your hospitals to more than 70
percent capacity
leave 30 percent in case you have a
surge
remember this virus is tricky
the rate of infection per a person who
gets infected today
shows up in the hospital 10 days from
today
or two weeks from today
so that infection rate goes up you don't
feel it for two weeks
there's a lag to it
you want to make sure you have 30
of the hospital beds available in case
you have
that surge also learn the lessons from
before
every hospital has to have 90 days of
ppe
for that hospital at the rate that they
have been using it during covert
we cannot have another mad scramble
where nurses and doctors don't have
gowns
and masks etc because
the hospitals don't have the necessary
stockpile so make sure every hospital
has the stockpile on the testing
we have done uh
really remarkable work on testing one
million new yorkers have now been tested
believe it or not and
the cdc coronavirus task force for the
white house recommends that
for a region to reopen you have 30 tests
for every 1 000 residents ready to go
so what testing capacity do we need for
a region to reopen
you have to be prepared to do 30 tests
for every 1 000 residents
new york is doing more tests than any
country in the state
by far new york is doing more tests than
any country on the globe
per capita so we're way ahead
in testing but it doesn't matter what
we're doing statewide
to open a region that region has to have
a testing capacity of 30
per 1000. the national guard has been
doing a great job for us
in putting together testing kits and
distributing testing kits
and we want to thank them very much but
we have to have those
tests and we have to have what they call
tracers
contact tracers in place and
mayor bloomberg has been very helpful
former mayor of new york city in putting
together this tracing system
this has never existed before on this
scale
a group of people who
literally trace contacts from a person
who's
positive who did you have dinner with
last night who did you have dinner with
two nights ago
who might you have been in contact with
and then
contacting those people to say do you
have any symptoms if you do you should
know
you were with uh john smith john smith
tested positive
he said he went to dinner with you you
should be on alert
that old tracing system has never been
done not only in this state but in this
country so this
that all has to be set up and it has to
be done
uh once that is all done
then you can talk about reopening
businesses well which businesses do we
open first you open businesses first
that are most essential and pose
the lowest risk okay most
essential and the lowest risk
phase one we're talking about
construction manufacturing
and select retail with curbside pickup
they are the most essential with the
lowest risk
second phase professional services
retail
administrative support real estate third
phase restaurant food services
accommodation
fourth arts entertainment recreation
education
remember density is not your friend here
large
gatherings are not your friend that's
where the virus tends to spread
that's why those situations would be
down
at the end and then we need businesses
to also reimagine how they're going to
do business
and get ready to protect their workforce
to change their physical environment to
the extent they need to
and to change their processes to make
sure people can socially distance people
remain
at a safe uh in a safe environment
and that's going to be up to businesses
to come up with ways to reconfigure
their workplace and their processes
to make this work and that's business by
business
government can say these are the
standards but a business is going to
have to figure out how to do that
when you look at this state there are
some regions that right now
by the numbers pose a lower risk
some that pose a higher risk we can tell
you
by region right now of
those criteria that we went through
which ones are in place for which region
so which ones have the right
hospitalization the right testing
regimen the right contract
contact tracing regimen and which ones
still have work to do in those areas
and this is going to be region by region
and each region has to put together the
leaders in those respective areas
who put together this system
and monitor this system literally on a
daily basis
so they're getting all that input all
those specifics
all that data and then day by day
they're making a decision as to how to
proceed with reopening
based on the data based
on the facts uh and that'll be a little
different
for every region in the state may 15th
is when the statewide
pause order p-a-u-s-e
not p-a-w-s
the pause order the pause order was stop
all businesses
stay at home that expires on may 15th
may 15th regions can start to
reopen and do their own analysis but
these are the facts that they have to
have in place to do it
start now don't wait till may 15th don't
call me up on may 15
and say well the pause order expired
i want to open because i'm going to ask
you the questions
i just asked i just presented
do you have a health care system in
place is your health
system ready can your hospitals handle
it do you have testing in place do you
have tracing
in place have you talked to the
businesses about how they're going to
reopen
so we have a couple of weeks but the
this is
what uh local leaders this is what a
community has to deal with
to reopen safely and intelligently
in my opinion this can't just be
we want to get out of the house we're
going
no let's be smart let's be intelligent
let's learn from the past let's do it
based on facts
you know we are at a different time and
place
government is uh
fundamentally in a different position
than it was
just a couple of months ago this is for
real
now right government politics it's not
about
optics it's not about celebrities not
about press releases it's not about
uh what i put on instagram
yesterday this is about
government leaders performance their
expertise
this is a situation where their
competence
and their ability can be the difference
between life and death
literally and what the governments have
done
federal state local what we've done in
this state
has literally saved lives
we reduced all the projected
hospitalization rates
dramatically by about a hundred thousand
new yorkers one hundred thousand fewer
new yorkers were hospitalized
than they predicted one hundred thousand
think about that
if we had one hundred thousand more
people in our hospital system
first of all our hospital system would
have collapsed
if the projections were true if we
didn't change those projections
and we literally saved lives how many of
those one hundred thousand
would have been hospitalized and would
have died
so we've done great work
at a tremendous cost and tremendous
hardship but we've done great work
we just have to remain vigilant and
smart
and competent going forward and that's
what new york tough means new york tough
means
we're tough but we're smart we're
disciplined we're unified and we are
loving
and it's the love of community and love
of each other
and respect for each other which is what
has gotten us through this
and we'll continue to thank you very
much for
taking the time to be here thank you for
the social distancing questions for
myself or any of my
if they're not wearing colleagues
outside
mask wearing
i said look i believe this is the
this is a time for sort of honest
straightforward talk
i said that i think it's disrespectful
of people not to wear masks i mean think
about it
you see all these commercials on tv we
thank you to our heroes thank you to the
nurses thank you to the doctors thank
you to the
transit workers thank you to the police
officers and we should be thankful
right they went to work so all of us
could stay safe and go home
the the least gratitude you can
show is at least wear the mask
so you don't infect more people who
place
more of a burden on the hospitals and
the nurses and the doctors who were all
saying thank you
for your your great service you really
want to say thank you
then respect them and respect their job
and wear the mask
so you don't infect people well i don't
want to wear a mask
it's not that big a deal and by the way
you don't wear a mask for yourself
you wear a mask to protect me i wear a
mask
to protect you uh
we owe each other a certain amount of
reasonableness
and respect in society and i owe
you that level of respect that if i'm
sick
i should wear a mask
local governments have the ability
to enforce and to penalize
that's up to local governments but do i
think local
government should be enforcing it and
should there be sanctions yes
yes because it is a public health
emergency
you know this is not just do me a favor
this is a public health
emergency and it's a statewide order
that i put in place
that i'm proud of and local governments
have the responsibility
to enforce it and part of
their right their legal right is they
can have a penalty
or a sanction that they impose so
rochester
can have one penalty you know it can be
appropriate
to the to the community new york city's
in a different situation
but yeah i think local government should
enforce it and i think there should be a
penalty
because you could liter literally kill
someone you could literally kill someone
because you didn't want to wear a mask
i mean how how cruel and irresponsible
would that be
yes yes
you don't have to worry no one said wear
a mask all the time right
uh wear a mask if you
may be in a situation where you can't
socially distance you go for a walk in
the woods
you don't have to be wearing a mask you
come to a point
even for you from your walk in the woods
where you're going to be in a parking
lot or there's an entrance and an exit
and you may
run into other people wear the mask
you can have the mask down
when you're walking in the woods but now
you see someone coming the other way
i'm going to pass by the other person
you put the mask on
i mean it's
it's the least that we can do
right everyone is killing themselves
people are working 24 hours a day show
some respect
show some basic modicum of
respect
yeah putting putting all of these
new systems in place is an incredible
task and you know in society now we have
a
uh temptation to blame well
who's to blame who's the blame nobody is
to blame
that we don't have testing capacity for
millions
of americans we've never done this
before our testing system was basically
for the flu
test or strep
or some other blood test when the doctor
would send you to a lab to get a blood
test we never had a testing system in
this nation
that could do this volume so this whole
thing is a scramble
and it was a scramble between the
federal government and the states who's
supposed to do it who's responsible
i had a good meeting with the president
a while back where we sat down and we
said look
the states should control the labs we
have about 300 labs in
in new york state we regulate them the
state should be
responsible for what they can do and we
need the federal government to help
where they can
the supply chain issue of reagents
manufacturing etc that is
an international supply chain ironically
so much of this stuff comes from china
it's like incredible on the testing the
reagents the chemicals
as well as the ppe when we were looking
for masks and gowns
everything was in china but the federal
government
has assumed the responsibility of that
international supply chain the reagents
etc
the states sort of take over at the
state line
but that supply has increased and we are
distributing it
and as you saw we're doing more testing
than any other state
or any other country per capita so we're
coming
online very very quickly uh but we still
have more to
for the rest of the do year and i spoke
to local superintendents who said
that they'll be waiting on state
guidance to start making those plans
so have you started reaching out to
schools
yeah they're going to get on what the
what plan they need to reopen schools
which is basically the analog
to what a business needs right i want to
reopen my
manufacturing company okay uh how do you
do it and keep people six feet apart
how do you do it in the cafeteria how do
you do it in the
transport how do you run your business
in a way
that's going to now meet the social
distancing guidelines same thing for
school
part of the issue for school was just
the
the gatherings in the school you have 25
students in a class
how do you put 25 students in a class
and they're six feet apart
i mean look at this space right even
these press conferences
uh you need for 20 people
you need you know a tremendous size room
how
how would you do that in a school how do
you socially distance
students do you need more classrooms
which means they need more teachers how
do you serve lunch
what do you do about the bus how do you
keep fewer students on the bus
so those kinds of details have to be in
the reopening plan they're good guidance
on that but it's going to be easier said
than done especially for school
because think about it the problem is
the gathering
a school is a gathering
that's what it is
if
what is
yeah look i get the whole liberate
movement
uh there's no reason for a
closing of anything just open everything
up
and let everybody go do whatever they
want to do
i get that argument
i hear it i understand it i'm
sympathetic to it
you know everybody wants out i also know
the facts
of what has happened to the places have
who have done
that and what you suggest that was
all those countries that saw saw a spike
in the number of cases right afterwards
saw a spike in the infection rate sort
of spike in the hospitalization saw a
spike in the number of deaths
and i would like to see as few new
yorkers pass away as possible
so yes people want to get out on the
other hand we want to do it in a
responsible way
and that's the whole question
no 80 and 90 of us don't get the
coronavirus
nobody has gotten the coronavirus before
some people say well this is like a flu
yeah it's not like a flu even 80 to 90
of us don't get the flu right but this
is a different
beast that we're dealing with and we
learn that the hard way you don't hear
anyone saying anymore
this is like the flu right that was back
in january february
that was before we had uh 18 000 people
in our hospitals in new york
this is not a float let's take one more
yes
yeah this is a national problem
we have unemployment systems states run
the unemployment system
in this case we have a lot of federal
benefits that are running through the
unemployment system
the unemployment system was set up with
phone operators and a website to handle
like
thousands of calls
thousands of input we now have millions
of inputs it has overwhelmed
every state unemployment website
office etc i talked to all the governors
on these conference calls
they're all struggling to deal with a
number of unemployment claims
federal government then just passed a
piece of legislation several weeks ago
that had additional
benefits for uh people
which then required new sign ups and
then they brought more
people to the websites etc
we have hired over 3 000 people
to actually run our unemployment
service our website and
to handle the telephones three thousand
people
which is just incredible just for the
unemployment
line and we've made great progress
there is still for some people a delay
because you do have to
document and certify that the person is
eligible you know this can't be just
somebody calls up and bob duffy calls
and you say okay and you send them a
check
federal law and common sense requires
that you affirm
certain information the good news is
even if there's a delay on the website
it doesn't cost you any money when you
get the check the check is from the date
of your eligibility
even though the website can be a pain in
the neck to deal with but i'll ask
melissa
de rosa who has been overseeing this
if she has an update on the unemployment
side on those people who have pending
status and this is actually very
important and commissioner reardon is
going to do a call later today to brief
out on the latest
what we found in the last several days
is that a lot of the people who are in
pending status have not gone on
and certified their unemployment status
which is a separate
process from going through the
application so you file the application
you do the phone call
you process through but then you have to
go into the website into your account
and certify that you're unemployed and
that's something you have to do
every week by saturday so you can either
do it on your website account or you can
call
there's two separate numbers for
unemployment insurance it's 888-581-5812
and for pandemic unemployment insurance
it's 833-324-0366
and you have to do that every single
week and certify that you are still
unemployed and eligible to work
and then they process that information
so we sent out 90 000 emails over the
weekend
to a batch of people we identified that
were stuck in that pending status
because of that
and as i said commissioner reardon's
going to be doing a more detailed call
this afternoon to continue to get this
information out to the public
but that is the number one thing that i
would recommend to those people who are
still sitting in pending status
yes priority status and just to
punctuate one other thing the governor
said about the flu the one big
difference between coronavirus and the
flu is that the flu has a vaccine
so for those people who are still making
that comparison i'd like you to consider
that
but you don't know what on the flu
vaccine on coronavirus you don't know
what percent is going to wind up getting
it
uh nobody does and the experts don't
know either
well that's not true but yeah let's say
it is true that the overwhelming number
of people who get it don't die
yeah okay yeah that's fine
unless you're the person who dies then
it's not so fine
i'm sorry yeah
yeah the the nursing homes
uh have seen in many ways the most
intense
uh issue here and when you think about
where this even started it started in a
nursing home
in washington state of washington
the vulnerable population are senior
citizens people with
comorbidities compromised immune systems
and a nursing home is a aggregation of
those people
and that's how it started and that is
where it is
most dangerous in the nursing homes i
understand that
i understand the nursing home staff has
been
doing people who staff these nursing
homes have been doing a fantastic job
because it really is very difficult and
we had to put some precautions in place
that are just
so harsh i mean we can't have
we said no visitors to a nursing home
during this entire time
i mean just think how harsh that is
right
but all it takes is one person to walk
into that nursing home with the virus
and then you're off to the races so
we're doing everything we can the
nursing homes are working very hard we
also announced an investigation
with the attorney general and the
department of health to make sure
the nursing homes are doing what they
need to do many of them are privately
run
but the state can regulate them
they have to notify families etc so
we're doing an investigation on that but
remember the basic premise of the
nursing home
the nursing home can only accept or keep
a patient
if if they can
provide adequate care for that patient
if they have a covid patient or
non-covet patient
but they can't provide adequate care for
that person
it is their obligation to transfer the
person
if they can't find a place to transfer
the person it's their obligation to call
the state department of health and the
state department of health will transfer
the person
we have facilities for
covered nursing home residents
we have some facilities that are just
for covid
positive nursing home residents
so we have those facilities available
if a nursing home can't care for a
covered
resident called the department of health
the department of health
will transfer the patient period
and that responsibility is on the
nursing home
they have to know who they can care for
and who they can't care for
if they can't care for them for any
reason
my staff is out sick i don't have the
ppe i can't quarantine i can't isolate
for whatever reason they have an
obligation to call the state department
of health and say
i have to transfer this person and we
have
existing facilities and beds for them
but the nursing home has to make that
determination
and if they are caring for people or
they have people who they're not
suited to care for then they're
violating
the state policy and that's part of what
this investigation
is going to look at so uh i've said to
nursing homes before i say it again
if you cannot provide adequate care
then that person has no business being
in your nursing home
and we do have facilities and we do have
beds
that can care for nursing home residents
and do it well and do it safely
last point i'd like to make the
today we're talking about what local
government officials have to do what
each region has to do
to be ready may 15th is a possible
reopening
if you're ready this is how you're ready
learning from the lessons on the science
on the facts
but this is a situation where yes
government
is first and foremost in a position
where they have to make
decisions and perform and do it well and
competence matters and professionalism
matters
and will hold government officials
accountable
i want to be held accountable hold
government officials accountable
but we also need local officials we need
our hospital
administrators to be a big part of this
and we need every citizen to be part of
this you know who's going to keep you
safe
you are you are not me
you are by your actions you know who's
going to keep your family safe
your family and you are by being
responsible
and reasonable in this situation and
then you know
how we keep each other safe by our
individual
responsibility and respect by wearing
the mask
by maintaining the social distancing
that's how we get through this
everybody has a role to play here
there is no pointing fingers nobody's
been here before
it's no one else's job it's all of us
together and that's what has worked
so well so far we just have to stay at
it it's been an honor to be with you
thank you very much
you